doc: installation: review section (#12437)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: doc/nrf/installation/install_ncs.rst

      #. Run the following command to list the available toolchain installations:

         .. code-block:: console

            nrfutil toolchain-manager search

         The versions from this list will be *toolchain_version* in the following step.
      #. Run the following command to install the toolchain version of your choice:

         .. parsed-literal::
            :class: highlight

            nrfutil toolchain-manager install --ncs-version *toolchain_version*

         For example:

         .. code-block:: console

            nrfutil toolchain-manager install --ncs-version v2.0.0

         The toolchain version should match the |NCS| version you are going to work with.
         If you have received a custom URL or a custom bundle ID for installing toolchain, you can use the following set of commands to provide it, replacing the respective parameters:

         .. parsed-literal::
            :class: highlight

            nrfutil toolchain-manager config --show
            nrfutil toolchain-manager config --set toolchain-index=*custom_toolchain_URL*
            nrfutil toolchain-manager install --bundle-id *custom_bundle_ID*

>          To read more about these commands, use the ``nrfutil toolchain-manager help`` command to open the help page.

Author: > only cover things such as completion

For now... ;)

Will use --help for the time being.

     - :ref:`Changelog <release_notes>` of the tag
   * - Branch
     - Branch name (for example, ``main``)
     - `sdk-nrf`_ repository

.. note::
   Unless you are familiar with the :ref:`development process <dev-model>`, you should always work with a specific release of the |NCS|.

For more information about the repository and development model, see the :ref:`dm_code_base` page.

.. tabs::

   .. group-tab:: nRF Connect for Visual Studio Code

      To clone the |NCS| code, complete the following steps:

      1. Open the nRF Connect extension in |VSC| by clicking its icon in the :guilabel:`Activity Bar`.
      #. In the extension's :guilabel:`Welcome View`, click on :guilabel:`Manage SDKs`.
         The list of actions appears in the |VSC|'s quick pick.
      #. Click :guilabel:`Install SDK`.
         The list of available SDK versions appears in the |VSC|'s quick pick.
      #. Select the SDK version to install.
         In most cases, you want the SDK version that matches your toolchain version.
         The SDK installation starts and it can take several minutes.

   .. group-tab:: Command line

      To clone the repositories, complete the following steps:

>       1. Create a folder named :file:`ncs`.

Author: Good point!

Depending on your preferred development environment, install the |NCS| toolchain:

.. tabs::

   .. group-tab:: nRF Connect for Visual Studio Code

      1. Open the nRF Connect extension in |VSC| by clicking its icon in the :guilabel:`Activity Bar`.
      #. In the extension's :guilabel:`Welcome View`, click on :guilabel:`Manage toolchains`.
         The list of actions appears in the |VSC|'s quick pick.
      #. Click :guilabel:`Install Toolchain`.
         The list of available toolchain versions appears in the |VSC|'s quick pick.
      #. Select the toolchain version to install.
         The toolchain version should match the |NCS| version you are going to work with.
         If you have received a custom URL for installing toolchain, you can provide it using the :guilabel:`Change Toolchain Index` button in the quick pick's header.
         The toolchain installation starts in the background, as can be seen in the notification that appears.

      When you install the toolchain for the first time, the installed version is automatically selected for your project.

   .. group-tab:: Command line

>       1. Open a command prompt window.

Reviewer: I think "command prompt" is a Windows specific term, "terminal" is a more universal term (also, nrfutil doesn't officially support command prompt, only `bash`, `zsh` & `pwsh`, so it's extra unfortunate)

      #. Run the following command to install the nRF Util ``toolchain-manager`` command:

         .. code-block:: console

            nrfutil install toolchain-manager

      #. Run the following command to list the available toolchain installations:

         .. code-block:: console

            nrfutil toolchain-manager search

         The versions from this list will be *toolchain_version* in the following step.
      #. Run the following command to install the toolchain version of your choice:

         .. parsed-literal::
            :class: highlight

            nrfutil toolchain-manager install --ncs-version *toolchain_version*

         For example:

         .. code-block:: console

            nrfutil toolchain-manager install --ncs-version v2.0.0

         The toolchain version should match the |NCS| version you are going to work with.

>       The toolchain is installed by default at :file:`C:/ncs/toolchains` on Windows, :file:`~/ncs` on Linux, and :file:`/opt/nordic/ncs` on macOS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      The toolchain is installed by default at :file:`C:\ncs` on Windows, :file:`~/ncs` on Linux, and :file:`/opt/nordic/ncs` on macOS.
```
Alternatively add the "toolchains" directory to all the paths

Author: I'll keep forward slash, as it is also supported on Windows.

Reviewer 2: On windows in command prompt? Are you sure?

Author: Yes

      #. In the extension's :guilabel:`Welcome View`, click on :guilabel:`Manage SDKs`.
         The list of actions appears in the |VSC|'s quick pick.
      #. Click :guilabel:`Install SDK`.
         The list of available SDK versions appears in the |VSC|'s quick pick.
      #. Select the SDK version to install.
         In most cases, you want the SDK version that matches your toolchain version.
         The SDK installation starts and it can take several minutes.

   .. group-tab:: Command line

      To clone the repositories, complete the following steps:

      1. Open the directory :file:`ncs`.
         This is one level up from the location where you installed the toolchain.
         This directory will hold all |NCS| repositories.

      #. Determine the identifier of the revision of the |NCS| you want to work with.
         See the table below for more information.

      #. On the command line, go to the :file:`ncs` directory (``cd ncs``) and initialize west with the revision of the |NCS| that you want to check out, replacing *nRFConnectSDK_revision* with the identifier:

         .. parsed-literal::

>             :class: highlight

Reviewer 2: isn't this just a full duplicate of the same information as the other commit has in installing.rst?

I see the file has moved, there should probably be a file redirect added from old to new URL

Author: Apologies for confusion, I've merged the two commits now.

.. _gs_installing_toolchain:
.. _gs_installing_tools:

.. rst-class:: numbered-step

Install the |NCS| toolchain
***************************

The |NCS| :term:`toolchain` includes the Zephyr SDK and then adds on top of it tools and modules required to build |NCS| samples and applications.
These include the :ref:`required tools <requirements_toolchain_tools>`, the Python dependencies, and the :ref:`GN tool <ug_matter_gs_tools_gn>` for creating :ref:`ug_matter` applications.

Depending on your preferred development environment, install the |NCS| toolchain:

.. tabs::

   .. group-tab:: nRF Connect for Visual Studio Code

      1. Open the nRF Connect extension in |VSC| by clicking its icon in the :guilabel:`Activity Bar`.
      #. In the extension's :guilabel:`Welcome View`, click on :guilabel:`Manage toolchains`.
         The list of actions appears in the |VSC|'s quick pick.
      #. Click :guilabel:`Install Toolchain`.
         The list of available toolchain versions appears in the |VSC|'s quick pick.
      #. Select the toolchain version to install.
         The toolchain version should match the |NCS| version you are going to work with.

>          If you have received a custom URL for installing toolchain, you can provide it using the :guilabel:`Change Toolchain Index` button in the quick pick's header.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
         If you have received a custom URL for installing the toolchain, you can provide it using the :guilabel:`Change Toolchain Index` button in the quick pick's header.
```

         The toolchain installation starts in the background, as can be seen in the notification that appears.

      When you install the toolchain for the first time, the installed version is automatically selected for your project.

   .. group-tab:: Command line

      1. Open a terminal window.
      #. Run the following command to install the nRF Util ``toolchain-manager`` command:

         .. code-block:: console

            nrfutil install toolchain-manager

      #. Run the following command to list the available toolchain installations:

         .. code-block:: console

            nrfutil toolchain-manager search

         The versions from this list will be *toolchain_version* in the following step.
      #. Run the following command to install the toolchain version of your choice:

         .. parsed-literal::
            :class: highlight

            nrfutil toolchain-manager install --ncs-version *toolchain_version*

         For example:

         .. code-block:: console

            nrfutil toolchain-manager install --ncs-version v2.0.0

>          The toolchain version should match the |NCS| version you are going to work with.

Reviewer 2: Incorrect

Author: Rephrased.

      The toolchain is installed by default at :file:`C:/ncs/toolchains` on Windows, :file:`~/ncs/toolchains` on Linux, and :file:`/opt/nordic/ncs/toolchains` on macOS.

>       If you have received a custom URL for installing toolchain, you can use the following command to set it as default, replacing the respective parameters:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      If you have received a custom URL for installing the toolchain, you can use the following command to set it as default, replacing the respective parameters:
```

      #. In the extension's :guilabel:`Welcome View`, click on :guilabel:`Manage SDKs`.
         The list of actions appears in the |VSC|'s quick pick.
      #. Click :guilabel:`Install SDK`.
         The list of available SDK versions appears in the |VSC|'s quick pick.
      #. Select the SDK version to install.
         In most cases, you want the SDK version that matches your toolchain version.
         The SDK installation starts and it can take several minutes.

   .. group-tab:: Command line

      To clone the repositories, complete the following steps:

      1. On the command line, open the directory :file:`ncs`.
         By default, this is one level up from the location where you installed the toolchain.
         This directory will hold all |NCS| repositories.

      #. Start the toolchain environment for your operating system using the following command:

         .. tabs::

            .. tab:: Windows

               .. code-block:: console

                  nrfutil toolchain-manager launch --terminal

            .. tab:: Linux

               .. code-block:: console

                  nrfutil toolchain-manager launch --shell

>             .. tab:: Windows

Reviewer 2: duplicate windows?

Author: Fixed. Should be macOS.

      ├─── .west/
      ├─── bootloader/
      ├─── modules/
      ├─── nrf/
      ├─── nrfxlib/
      ├─── zephyr/
      └─── ...

In this simplified structure preview, *<home>* corresponds to :file:`ncs/` and *<toolchain-installation>* and *<west-workspace>* correspond to the version names you installed.
There are also additional directories, and the structure might change over time, for example if you later :ref:`change the state of development to a different revision <updating_repos>`.
The full set of repositories and directories is defined in the manifest file.

.. _build_environment_cli:

Set up the command-line build environment
*****************************************

In addition to the steps mentioned above, if you want to build and program your application from the command line, you have to set up your command-line build environment by defining the required environment variables every time you open a new command-line or terminal window.
See :ref:`zephyr:important-build-vars` for more information about the various relevant environment variables.

Define the required environment variables as follows, depending on your operating system:

.. tabs::

   .. tab:: Windows

>       Navigate to the :file:`ncs` directory and enter the following command: ``zephyr\zephyr-env.cmd``

Reviewer 2: This should state using what, because someone reading this is going to open a file explorer view, go to this file, double click it and think what's that meant to do

Author: Rephrased.

               source ~/.bashrc

         .. group-tab:: macOS

            Enter the following command in a terminal window:

            .. code-block:: console

               pip3 install west

      ..

   ..

#. Get the |NCS| code as described in :ref:`cloning_the_repositories`.
#. Install the Python dependencies.
   Expand the section below to see the commands.

   .. toggle::

      .. note::

         You might run into Python package incompatibilities when installing dependencies at a system or user level.
         For this reason, it is suggested to use `Python virtual environments`_.

      .. tabs::

         .. group-tab:: Windows

            1. Use the following command to install the Python ``venv`` package:

               .. code-block:: bash

                  pip install virtualenv

            #. Create a new virtual environment:

               .. code-block:: bash

                  cd %HOMEPATH%
                  python -m venv ncs\.venv

            #. Activate the virtual environment:

               .. code-block:: bash

                  :: cmd.exe
                  ncs\.venv\Scripts\activate.bat
                  :: PowerShell

>                   ncs\.venv\Scripts\Activate.ps1

Reviewer 2: Let's get rid of powershell unless someone can confirm it is supported and works (I have heard of no such support)

     - Where to find the identifier
   * - Specific release (recommended)
     - Release tag (for example, |release_tt|)
     - :ref:`Release_notes` of the release
   * - :ref:`Development tag <dm-revisions>`
     - Development tag (for example, ``v1.9.2-dev1``)
     - :ref:`Changelog <release_notes>` of the tag
   * - Branch
     - Branch name (for example, ``main``)
     - `sdk-nrf`_ repository

.. note::
   Unless you are familiar with the :ref:`development process <dev-model>`, you should always work with a specific release of the |NCS|.

For more information about the repository and development model, see the :ref:`dm_code_base` page.

.. tabs::

   .. group-tab:: nRF Connect for Visual Studio Code

      To clone the |NCS| code, complete the following steps:

      1. Open the nRF Connect extension in |VSC| by clicking its icon in the :guilabel:`Activity Bar`.
      #. In the extension's :guilabel:`Welcome View`, click on :guilabel:`Manage SDKs`.
         The list of actions appears in the |VSC|'s quick pick.
      #. Click :guilabel:`Install SDK`.
         The list of available SDK versions appears in the |VSC|'s quick pick.
      #. Select the SDK version to install.

>          In most cases, you want the SDK version that is either matching or higher than the :ref:`Toolchain version you have chosen <gs_installing_toolchain>`.

Reviewer 4: This is not true. Mostly other way around, but not exactly.
Keep in mind that the users first choose the SDK they will work with, not the toolchain, although first they need to install the toolchain.

Something like this:
```suggestion
         Make sure that your active toolchain's _major.minor_ version is at least the same or higher than the SDK version that you intend to install.
```

Reviewer 2: I don't think that's true either, the toolchain will only be built if something changes, so NCS 2.6, 2.7, 2.908 could be released and if the toolchain doesn't change then it will still be toolchain 2.5.x

Reviewer 4: In which case the only suggestion we can give is to install the latest and greatest and if something doesn't work in the future, then upgrade.

Author: I will include the recommendation to install the latest released version of the SDK and the toolchain. I think considerations about discrepancies in the versioning should go somewhere else, potentially in Updating tools and repositories (that is, separate PR).

        Download it from the `nRF Command Line Tools`_ page.

        .. note::
            After downloading and installing the tools, add nrfjprog to the system :envvar:`PATH` in the environment variables.

.. _gs_installing_toolchain:
.. _gs_installing_tools:

.. rst-class:: numbered-step

Install the |NCS| toolchain
***************************

The |NCS| :term:`toolchain` includes the Zephyr SDK and then adds on top of it tools and modules required to build |NCS| samples and applications.
These include the :ref:`required tools <requirements_toolchain_tools>`, the Python dependencies, and the :ref:`GN tool <ug_matter_gs_tools_gn>` for creating :ref:`ug_matter` applications.

When you first install the |NCS|, it is recommended to install the latest released versions of the SDK and the toolchain.

Depending on your preferred development environment, complete the following steps:

.. tabs::

   .. group-tab:: nRF Connect for Visual Studio Code

      1. Open the nRF Connect extension in |VSC| by clicking its icon in the :guilabel:`Activity Bar`.
      #. In the extension's :guilabel:`Welcome View`, click on :guilabel:`Manage toolchains`.

>          The list of actions appears in the |VSC|'s quick pick.
>       #. Click :guilabel:`Install Toolchain`.
>          The list of available toolchain versions appears in the |VSC|'s quick pick.
>       #. Select the toolchain version to install.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
      #. In the Toolchain Management menu, click :guilabel:`Install Toolchain`.
      #. Select the toolchain version to install.
```

These "The list of ABCs appears in the Visual Studio Code's quick pick" sentences look a bit broken, and they're a bit redundant. I suggest we remove them.

Simply put, you can work with the following versions of the |NCS|:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - |NCS| version
     - Required identifier of the revision
     - Where to find the identifier
   * - Specific release (recommended)
     - Release tag (for example, |release_tt|)
     - :ref:`Release_notes` of the release
   * - :ref:`Development tag <dm-revisions>`
     - Development tag (for example, ``v1.9.2-dev1``)
     - :ref:`Changelog <release_notes>` of the tag
   * - Branch
     - Branch name (for example, ``main``)
     - `sdk-nrf`_ repository

.. note::
   Unless you are familiar with the :ref:`development process <dev-model>`, you should always work with a specific release of the |NCS|.

For more information about the repository and development model, see the :ref:`dm_code_base` page.

.. tabs::

   .. group-tab:: nRF Connect for Visual Studio Code

      To clone the |NCS| code, complete the following steps:

      1. Open the nRF Connect extension in |VSC| by clicking its icon in the :guilabel:`Activity Bar`.

>       #. In the extension's :guilabel:`Welcome View`, click on :guilabel:`Manage SDKs`.
>          The list of actions appears in the |VSC|'s quick pick.
>       #. Click :guilabel:`Install SDK`.
>          The list of available SDK versions appears in the |VSC|'s quick pick.
>       #. Select the SDK version to install.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
      #. In the extension's :guilabel:`Welcome View`, click on :guilabel:`Manage SDKs`.
      #. In the SDK management menu, click :guilabel:`Install SDK`.
      #. Select the SDK version to install.
```

There are different ways to install the |NCS|, depending on your preferred development environment and the :ref:`toolchain management tool <toolchain_management_tools>`:

* Using |VSC| and the |nRFVSC| (recommended)
* Using command line and nRF Util

Regardless of which way you choose, the following steps install the |NCS| source code and the |NCS| :term:`toolchain`.
This includes everything that is required by Zephyr's :ref:`zephyr:getting_started` together with additional tools and Python dependencies that the |NCS| uses.

.. rst-class:: numbered-step

Update operating system
***********************

Before you start setting up the toolchain, install available updates for your operating system.
See :ref:`requirements` for information on the supported operating systems.

.. _installing_vsc:

.. rst-class:: numbered-step

Install prerequisites
*********************

Depending on your preferred development environment, install the following tools:

.. tabs::

   .. group-tab:: nRF Connect for Visual Studio Code

      * The latest version of |VSC| for your operating system from the `Visual Studio Code download page`_.
      * In |VSC|, the latest version of the |nRFVSC|.

>         For installation instructions, see `How to install the extension`_.

Reviewer 6: This is weird because it links to https://nrfconnect.github.io/vscode-nrf-connect/get_started/install.html which in turn then links to https://developer.nordicsemi.com/nRF_Connect_SDK/doc/latest/nrf/installation/assistant.html. Something is not right, I think we need @trond-snekvik  here.

Author: Let me simplify this.

Author: Pointed directly to VSC Marketplace. The page in the VSC docs will be rewritten once this PR is merged.

      #. Export a :ref:`Zephyr CMake package <zephyr:cmake_pkg>`.
         This allows CMake to automatically load the boilerplate code required for building |NCS| applications:

         .. code-block:: console

            west zephyr-export
..

If you used the default locations, your directory structure now looks similar to this:

.. code-block:: none

   <home>/
   ├─── toolchains/
   │  └─── <toolchain-installation>
   └─── <west-workspace>/
      ├─── .west/
      ├─── bootloader/
      ├─── modules/
      ├─── nrf/
      ├─── nrfxlib/
      ├─── zephyr/
      └─── ...

In this simplified structure preview, *<home>* corresponds to :file:`ncs/` and *<toolchain-installation>* and *<west-workspace>* correspond to the version names you installed.
There are also additional directories, and the structure might change over time, for example if you later :ref:`change the state of development to a different revision <updating_repos>`.
The full set of repositories and directories is defined in the :ref:`manifest file <zephyr:west-manifest-files>` (`see the file in the repository <west manifest file_>`_).

.. _build_environment_cli:

> Set up the command-line build environment

Reviewer 6: Note to reviewers, here's the rendered page: https://developer.nordicsemi.com/nRF_Connect_SDK_dev/doc/PR-12437/nrf/installation/install_ncs.html

> Set up the command-line build environment

Reviewer 6: Agreed to leave the section there.

> Set up the command-line build environment

Reviewer 5: Could potentially add a sentence about how this is only necessary if you work in a freestanding application

*****************************************

In addition to the steps mentioned above, if you want to build and program your application from the command line, you have to set up your command-line build environment by defining the required environment variables every time you open a new command-line or terminal window.
See :ref:`zephyr:important-build-vars` for more information about the various relevant environment variables.

Define the required environment variables as follows, depending on your operating system:

.. tabs::

   .. tab:: Windows

      Navigate to the :file:`ncs` directory and run the following command in a terminal window:

      .. code-block:: console

         zephyr\zephyr-env.cmd

      If you need to define additional environment variables, create the file :file:`%userprofile%\zephyrrc.cmd` and add the variables there.
      This file is loaded automatically when you run the above command.
      See :ref:`Zephyr documentation about using zephyrrc files <zephyr:env_vars_zephyrrc>` for more information.

   .. tab:: Linux

      Navigate to the :file:`ncs` directory and run the following command in a terminal window:

      .. code-block:: console

>          zephyr\zephyr-env.cmd

Reviewer 2: incorrect

Author: Let me hide out of shame for the copy-paste error. Thanks for spotting!

      If you need to define additional environment variables, create the file :file:`~/.zephyrrc` and add the variables there.
      This file is loaded automatically when you run the above command.
      See :ref:`Zephyr documentation about using zephyrrc files <zephyr:env_vars_zephyrrc>` for more information.

   .. tab:: macOS

      Navigate to the :file:`ncs` directory and run the following command in a terminal window:

      .. code-block:: console

>          zephyr\zephyr-env.cmd

Reviewer 2: incorrect

   #. Set up the preferred building method:

      .. tabs::

         .. tab:: nRF Connect for Visual Studio Code

            To build on the |nRFVSC|, complete the following steps:

            a. In Toolchain Manager, click the :guilabel:`Open VS Code` button.

               A notification appears with a list of missing extensions that you need to install, including those from the `nRF Connect for Visual Studio Code`_ extension pack.
            #. Click **Install missing extensions**.
            #. Once the extensions are installed, click **Open VS Code** button again.

            You can then follow the instructions in :ref:`creating_vsc`.

         .. tab:: Command line

            To build on the command line, complete the following steps:

            1. With admin permissions enabled, download and install the `nRF Command Line Tools`_.
            #. Restart the Toolchain Manager application.
            #. Click the dropdown menu for the installed nRF Connect SDK version.

               .. figure:: images/gs-assistant_tm_dropdown.png
                  :alt: The Toolchain Manager dropdown menu for the installed nRF Connect SDK version, cropped

>                The Toolchain Manager dropdown menu options

Reviewer 2: Missing indent
